samples: bluetooth: adding direct_test_mode sample (#2482)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: samples/bluetooth/direct_test_mode/README.rst

.. _direct_test_mode:

Bluetooth: Direct Test Mode
###########################

This sample enables the Direct Test Mode functions described in `Bluetooth Core Specification`_: Version 5.0, Vol. 6, Part F.

Overview
********

> The sample uses Direct Test Mode to verify the operation of the radio at the physical level, testing:

Reviewer: fixed

> * Transmission power and receiver sensitivity,

Reviewer: fixed

* Frequency offset and drift,
* Modulation characteristics,
* Packet error rate,
* Intermodulation performance.

Test procedures are defined in the document `Bluetooth Low Energy RF PHY Test Specification`_: Document number RF-PHY.TS/5.0.0.

> You can carry out conformance tests using dedicated test equipment, such as the Anritsu MT8852 or similar, with the nRF5 running the DTM application set as device under test (DUT).

Author: nRF5: any nRF5x SoC (nRF5340, etc.)

However, this sample currently supports only nRF5340. Still, I think that we don't want to be too specific in the general description so that we don't have to change it frequently when adding support for new devices.

> You can carry out conformance tests using dedicated test equipment, such as the Anritsu MT8852 or similar, with the nRF5 running the DTM application set as device under test (DUT).

Reviewer: For now I edited this as sample, but please @kapi-no and @bjorn-tore-taraldsen let me know if this should be treated as an application.

> You can carry out conformance tests using dedicated test equipment, such as the Anritsu MT8852 or similar, with the nRF5 running the DTM application set as device under test (DUT).

Author: Let's leave it as a sample and refer to it that way (discussed this point with @bjorn-tore-taraldsen)

DTM application
===============

> The nRF5 DTM application includes two parts:

Reviewer: fixed

* The DTM - Direct Test Mode library, which manages the nRF radio and controls the standard DTM procedures.
* An application that provides an external interface to the library.

You can find the source code of both parts here: :file:`samples/bluetooth/direct_test_mode/src`.

The DTM application contains a driver for a 2-wire UART interface.
The driver maps two-octet commands and events to the DTM library, as specified by the Bluetooth Low Energy DTM specification.

.. figure:: /images/bt_dtm_dut.svg
   :alt: nRF5 with DTM as a DUT

The implementation is self-contained and requires no Bluetooth Low Energy protocol stack for its operation.
The MPU is initialized in the standard way.
The DTM library function ``dtm_init`` configures all interrupts, timers, and the radio.

``main.c`` may be replaced with other interface implementations, such as an HCI interface, USB, or another interface required by the Upper Tester.

> The interface to the Lower Tester uses the antenna connector of the chosen nRF5 Development Kit.

Reviewer: fixed

While in principle an aerial connection might be used, conformance tests cover the reading of the transmission power delivered by the DUT.
For this reason, a coaxial connection between the DUT and the Lower Tester is employed for all conformance testing.

DTM module interface
====================

The DTM function ``dtm_cmd_put`` implements the four commands defined by the Bluetooth Low Energy standard:

* TEST SETUP (called RESET in Bluetooth 4.0)
* RECEIVER_TEST
* TRANSMITTER_TEST
* TEST_END

In the ``dtm_cmd_put`` interface, DTM commands are accepted in the 2-byte format.

> Parameters such as: CMD code, Frequency, Length or Packet Type are encoded within this command.

Reviewer: fixed

The following DTM events are polled using the ``dtm_event_get`` function:

* PACKET_REPORTING_EVENT
* TEST_STATUS_EVENT [SUCCESS|FAIL]

.. figure:: /images/bt_dtm_engine.svg
   :alt: State machine overview of the DTM

Supported PHYs
==============

The DTM application supports all four PHYs specified in DTM, but not all devices support all the PHYs.

.. list-table:: Supported PHYs
   :header-rows: 1

   * - PHY
     - nRF5340
   * - LE 1M
     - Yes
   * - LE 2M
     - Yes
   * - LE Coded S=8
     - Yes
   * - LE Coded S=2
     - Yes

> Vendor Specific packet payload

Reviewer: fixed

==============================

The Bluetooth Low Energy 2-wire UART DTM interface standard reserves the Packet Type, also called payload parameter, with binary value '11' for a Vendor Specific packet payload.

The DTM command is interpreted as a Vendor Specific one when both the following conditions are met:

* Its CMD field is set to Transmitter Test, binary '10'.
* Its PKT field is set to Vendor Specific, binary '11'.

Vendor specific commands can be divided into different categories as follows:

> * If the Length field is set to 0 (symbol ``CARRIER_TEST``), an unmodulated carrier is turned on at the channel indicated by Frequency field.

Reviewer: fixed

  It remains turned on until a ``TEST_END`` or ``RESET`` command is issued.

> * If the Length field is set to 1 (symbol ``CARRIER_TEST_STUDIO``), is used by the nRFgo Studio to indicate that an unmodulated carrier is turned on at the channel.

Author: This command is here to maintain backward compatibility with DTM application from nRF5 SDK. I didn't mention it in the requirements, because it is not necessary to use this command to have DTM working.

  It remains turned on until a ``TEST_END`` or ``RESET`` command is issued.

> * If the Length field is set 2 (symbol ``SET_TX_POWER``), Frequency field sets the TX power in dBm.

Reviewer: fixed

>   The valid TX powers are specified in the product specification ranging from -40 to +4.

Reviewer: fixed

  0 dBm is the reset value.
  Only the 6 least significant bits will fit in the length field.
  The two most significant bits are calculated by the DTM module.

>   This is possible because the 6 least significant bits of all valid TX powers are unique.

Reviewer: fixed

  The TX power can be modified only when no Transmitter Test or Receiver Test is running.
* All other values of Frequency and Length field are reserved.

> The DTM to Serial adaptation layer

Reviewer: fixed

.. note::
   On the nRF5340 development kit, the Direct Test Mode sample is a standalone network sample.
   It does not require any counterpart application sample.
   However, you must still program the application core to boot up the network core.
   You can use any sample for this, for example :ref:`nrf5340_empty_app_core`.

The Bluetooth Low Energy DTM UART interface standard specifies:

* 8 data bits
* No parity
* 1 stop bit
* No hardware flow control
* A selection of bit rates from 9600 to 1000000, one of which must be supported by the DUT.
  It might be possible to run other bit rates through experimenting with parameters.

The default bit rate of the DTM UART driver is 19200 bps, which is supported by most certified testers.

Testing
=======

After programming the sample to your development kit, you can test it in the three following ways.

.. note::
   For the nRF5340 development kit, see :ref:`logging_cpunet` for information on how to make the PC terminal work with the network core.

.. _direct_test_mode_testing_anritsu:

Testing with certified tester
-----------------------------

Conformance testing is done using a certified tester.

> The setup depends on the actual tester, and details about the test operation must be found in the tester documentation.

Reviewer: fixed

Application note `nAN34`_ describes two alternatives for setting up a production test with DTM:

> * an Anritsu MT8852B Bluetooth Test Set and the nRF8001 Development Kit,

Reviewer: Could you check this? Thanks! @kapi-no

> * an Anritsu MT8852B Bluetooth Test Set and the nRF8001 Development Kit,

Author: This is something that was taken from the nRF5 SDK:
https://infocenter.nordicsemi.com/index.jsp?topic=%2Fsdk_nrf5_v17.0.0%2Fble_sdk_app_dtm_serial.html
nRF8001 is also not supported there, but this document is quite old and shows how to set up nRF device with Anritsu. Perhaps we can make more general statement like:
```suggestion
* an Anritsu MT8852B Bluetooth Test Set and a Nordic Development Kit,
```

Anritsu is specialised test equipment. We can treat Anritsu like smartphones that we mention in our NFC Readmes. We do not support smartphones in NCS but we still mention them as testing devices.

> * an Anritsu MT8852B Bluetooth Test Set and the nRF8001 Development Kit,

Author: Here is a final suggestion on how to rewrite this part (discussed together with @bjorn-tore-taraldsen):

https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/2482#discussion_r475684571

> * an Anritsu MT8852B Bluetooth Test Set and the nRF8001 Development Kit,

Reviewer: well fixed as per comment #2482

#. Start ``RECEIVER_TEST`` by sending the ``0x40 0x96`` DTM command to the second development kit.
   Command parameters are identical to the ones used for the ``TRANSMITTER_TEST`` command.
#. Observe that you received the ``TEST_STATUS_EVENT`` packet in response with the SUCCESS status field: ``0x00 0x00``.
#. Finish RX testing using the ``TEST_END DTM`` command by sending the ``0xC0 0x00`` packet.
#. Observe that you received the ``PACKET_REPORTING_EVENT`` packet in response.
   For example, the ``0xD6 0xAC`` message indicates that 22188 Radio packets have been received.
#. Experiment with other combinations of commands and their parameters.

.. _direct_test_mode_testing_app:

Testing with nRF Connect for Desktop
------------------------------------

1. Connect the development kit to the computer using a USB cable.
   The computer assigns to the development kit a COM port on Windows or ttyACM device on Linux, which is visible in the Device Manager.
#. |connect_terminal|
#. Start the ``TRANSMITTER_TEST`` by sending the ``0x80 0x96`` DTM command to the connected development kit.

>    This command will trigger TX activity on 2402MHz frequency (1st channel) with ``10101010`` packet pattern and 37-byte packet length.

Reviewer: fixed

#. Observe that you received the ``TEST_STATUS_EVENT`` packet in response with the SUCCESS status field: ``0x00 0x00``.
#. Start the Direct Test Mode application in nRF Connect for Desktop and select the development kits to communicate with.
#. Set the Receiver mode and 37th channel in the test configuration menu.
#. Start the test.

> #. On the application chart, observe that the number of RX packets is increasing for 2402MHz MHz channel.

Reviewer: fixed

* If the Length field is set ``2`` (symbol ``SET_TX_POWER``), Frequency field sets the TX power in dBm.
  The valid TX powers are specified in the product specification ranging from -40 to +4.
  0 dBm is the reset value.
  Only the 6 least significant bits will fit in the length field.
  The two most significant bits are calculated by the DTM module.
  This is possible because the 6 least significant bits of all valid TX powers are unique.
  The TX power can be modified only when no Transmitter Test or Receiver Test is running.
* All other values of Frequency and Length field are reserved.

The DTM-to-Serial adaptation layer
==================================

``main.c`` is an implementation of the UART interface specified in the`Bluetooth Core Specification`_: Vol. 6, Part F, Chap. 3.

The default selection of UART pins is defined in ``zephyr/boards/arm/board_name/board_name.dts``.
You can change the defaults using the symbols ``tx-pin`` and ``rx-pin`` in the DTS overlay file at the project level.

Requirements
************

* The following development kit:

.. include:: /includes/boardname_tables/sample_boardnames.txt
   :start-after: set15_start

>    :end-before: set15_end

Author: This set supports only Application Core from the nRF5340 DK. However, this sample should be run on the Network Core.

I think we need to define a new set with nRF5340 Network Core support only. There is set4 which supports this target but it also includes nRF52 devices. It's a good starting point for this new set definition.

Reviewer: fixed

   It does not require any counterpart application sample.
   However, you must still program the application core to boot up the network core.
   You can use any sample for this, for example :ref:`nrf5340_empty_app_core`.

The Bluetooth Low Energy DTM UART interface standard specifies:

* 8 data bits
* No parity
* 1 stop bit
* No hardware flow control
* A selection of bit rates from 9600 to 1000000, one of which must be supported by the DUT.
  It might be possible to run other bit rates through experimenting with parameters.

The default bit rate of the DTM UART driver is 19200 bps, which is supported by most certified testers.

Testing
=======

After programming the sample to your development kit, you can test it in the three following ways.

.. note::
   For the nRF5340 development kit, see :ref:`logging_cpunet` for information on how to make the PC terminal work with the network core.

.. _direct_test_mode_testing_anritsu:

Testing with certified tester
-----------------------------

Conformance testing is done using a certified tester.
The setup depends on the tester used, and details about the test operation must be found in the tester documentation.

> Application note `nAN34`_ describes two alternatives for setting up a production test with DTM:
> 
> * an Anritsu MT8852B Bluetooth Test Set and the nRF8001 Development Kit,
> * the nRF51822 Development Kit together with a computer as the tester.

Author: Let's phrase it this way:

```suggestion
Application note  `nAN34`_ describes two alternatives for setting up a production test with DTM using one of our old devices.
```

Reviewer: fixed
